---
layout: post
title: Marx on Democracy
img: npd.jpg
---

<p><strong>Marx on Democracy</strong><br>
Why the end (τέλος) of democracy is the end (terminus) of democracy</p>
<p><em>“Democracy is human existence, while in the other political forms man has only legal existence. That is the fundamental difference of democracy,” Marx writes in his Citique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. The title of this essay is obviously a boutade. This text tries to demonstrate that the end of democracy is overcoming democracy as it is appears in modern society. Two main reasons are put forward to clarify the need for departing from this form of democracy, two drivers of dialectic change in history it could be argued. These are firstly, the loss of a sense of community in modern society and secondly, the separation of state and civil society. These developments are considered in the first two parts of this essay and are mutually reinforcing. The third part of the essay clarifies what would be left of modern democracy when the end of democracy is reached. An assessment of Marx’s true democracy vis-à-vis institutional democracy is made in the last part. Concluding that Marx subscribed to authoritarian ideas because he prophesises the end of democracy, would be a mistake. If anything, he could be considered a utopian, predicting a movement towards a spontaneous, organic form of democracy.</em></p>
<p><strong>1.</strong> Put simply, democratic rule should not be regarded as the mere sum of ideas of individuals in a society according to Marx. When in the  _1844 Manuscripts_he writes that communism is “the resolution of the antithesis between essence and existence, form and content, individual and species; it is the riddle of history solved and knows itself to be that solution,”[1]he is stressing the importance of transcending the individualistic idea of participatory democracy. Democracy should entail a representation of the community as a whole.[2]In order to achieve that, a set of shared moral principles is crucial. Marx argues that this sense of moral community has gone astray due to the corruption of two values essential to its existence: freedom and equality.[3]The  _Communist Manifesto_denounces the bourgeois form of freedom, stating that “by freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of production, free trade, free selling and buying.”[4]To Marx, this modern conception of freedom is an illusion. Real freedom goes beyond these formal preconditions. It is a moral consciousness that distinguishes itself from necessity,[5]it is the capacity to subjugate instinct to reason.[6]In the current, bourgeois form of freedom, people are not free because their instincts can be manipulated. Capitalism for example has the capacity to make people internalise the idea of ever renewing needs, allowing workers to be enslaved to fulfil these needs. Marx refers to this condition of the “free labouring poor” as the “veiled slavery of the wage workers”.[7]The equality that flows from bourgeois freedom is based on the ability to exchange the value of labour as a commodity. All individuals are equally free (in the bourgeois sense) to do so. Opposed to that is a form of equality based on the distribution of social goods according to unmanipulated needs.[8]For Marx, this is the real value of equality.</p>
<p><strong>2.</strong> The state as an abstract, distinct entity transcending the struggles of civil society and striving for universality is a key aspect of Hegel’s political philosophy. It ought to be seen as  a framework distinct from the individuals that take office in it.  [9]To Marx however, the state apparatus is nothing but a vehicle to impose the will of a dominant segment of the population on the rest of society.[10]“Democracy is content and form,” meaning you can’t separate the individuals and their views (content) from their offices (form), whereas “[Hegelian] monarchy might be only form, but it falsifies the content”.[11],[12]Hegel’s separation of state and civil society leads to a division of the human being into a public and a private sphere, a general and a particular identity. In one sphere, individuals are supposed to rise above their personal interests and act in accordance with the greater good, a universalist view of the world. The private sphere is mostly centred around individual economic activity. According to Marx, this separation ignores the social essence of the individual. The split between spheres is the cause of the alienation of Man.[13]“The abstract, reflected opposition [between popular life and state-, or political-life] belong only to modern times. […]; modern times is the abstract dualism.”[14]In the current modern form of democracy, this alienation, which Marx calls “abstract dualism”, has been institutionalised. As the key to achieving full self-realisation is overcoming the alienation of Man, the division of state and civil society also has to be overcome. Therefore, the teleological end of democracy, as a part of the end of history, is to overcome this artificially separated ordering of society. That implies doing away with the modern form of democracy.</p>
<p><strong>3.</strong> If something ends, it is followed by a situation that is characterised by being different, or non-existent, from before. For that purpose, it is important to analyse Marx’s ideas of what would follow the end of democracy in order to safely state that democracy is indeed to end. The  _Communist Manifesto_states that “the public power will loose its political character”.[15]Concretely, that means that social organisation will no longer take the form of a state, because the apparatus will not be manned by a political class, but rather by the community as a whole, and any form of state coercion will be abolished.[16]At this point, it is tempting to conclude that Marx was in essence an anarchist who challenged every form of authority. Marx’s writing are especially vague on how society is organised under this new social organisation, which he calls an administration rather than a state. First of all, the administration’s functions would be analogous to that of the modern state, to the extent that they are necessary. As the new social organisation will be fully in line with Man’s rationality, individuals will follow its rules, which are drafted collectively and according to majority rule, voluntarily.[17]That does not mean every individual can take part in every decision making process. Only when there is room and time to do so is that the case and if not, a delegate appointed by the public will take the decision.[18]</p>
<p><strong>4.</strong> Marx, often very complex and thorough when analysing sociological phenomena, is incredibly vague when describing his take on the end of democracy. His answer to the enigma of history, an organic unity of rational individuals working together, seems almost naively utopian.[19]When searching for an answer to the “paradox of freedom”, one only finds the prophecy of the automatic alignment of fully rational individuals.[20]The function of the state as guaranteeing each person’s freedom by limiting the freedom of the other seems to be overlooked, or dismissed as a manifestation of “mere formal freedom”.[21]The main problem for Marx with the modern democratic state seems to be the institutionalisation of democracy. In a truly democratic, conflict-free world, this artificial framework should be transcended. As modern institutional democracy could be regarded as a system acknowledging conflicts within society and channelling them into in a workable form of social governance, it is evident that such a system looses its purpose in Marx’s utopian end of history.[22]It basically comes down to a distinction between constitutional democracy and true democracy.[23]The former is idealist and based on a believe of individuals forming a unity once they are fully rationalised.[24]The latter is realist and based on learning to live with differences. In the end, predictably, it comes down to what is understood as an ‘end’: is it a terminus which will be reached at some point in history, or is it a guiding thread which can be used to measure the current state of affairs, but cannot be realistically achieved?</p>
<p><strong>Conclusion</strong></p>
<p>Marx’s view of democracy is radically different from modern democracy, which could be described as institutional democracy. Instead, he prophesises a community acting in unity. That unity is based on two fundamental values: true freedom of rational Man in a rational social organisation and equality according to real social needs. In modern society, these values are corrupted. Also obstructing the unity of Man is the artificial separation of public and private life. Not only is it  <em>de facto</em> impossible to regard an individual as distinct from the office he holds, forcing Man to split into a private and a public sphere also causes alienation. The end of history is to overcome alienation. Therefore, this separation is to be overcome.  When the conditions for unity are fulfilled, a utopian, coercion-free, voluntarily associated administration will arise. Therefor, the title of this essay could be reformulated as: the end of constitutional, institutional democracy is true, pure democracy. When fully rational Man in a fully rational social organisation achieves a conflict free world, constitutional democracy, as a system of institutionalised conflict containment, becomes without object. When the last social conflict is resolved through institutional democracy, it is transcended by true democracy. That is the end of democracy.</p>
<p><strong>Bibliography</strong></p>
<p>Abensour, Miguel.  <em>Democracy against the State : Marx and the Machiavellian Moment</em>. Polity, 2011.</p>
<p>Avineri, Shlomo.  _The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx._Cambridge University Press, 1968.</p>
<p>Hunt, Richard N.  <em>The Political Ideas of Marx and Engels. 2, Classical Marxism 1850-1895</em>. Macmillan, 1984.</p>
<p>Krancberg, Sigmund. “Karl Marx and Democracy.” <em>Studies in Soviet Thought</em>, Vol. 24, No. 1, 1982.</p>
<p>Marx, Karl, et al.  <em>Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844</em>. Foreign Languages Publishing House; Lawrence &amp; Wishart, 1959.</p>
<p>Marx, Karl, et al.  <em>Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society</em>. Anchor, 1967.</p>
<p>Marx, Karl, O’Malley, Joseph.  _Critique of Hegel’s ‘Philosophy of Right’._Cambridge U.P., 1970.</p>
<p>Marx, Karl.  <em>Capital</em>,  _A Critique of Political Economy,_<em>Volume I, Book One: The Process of Production of Capital</em>. Progress Publishers, 1967.</p>
<p>Marx, Karl.  <em>The__Communist Manifesto</em>. Electric Book Company, 2000.</p>
<p>Mastellone, Salvo.  <em>Mazzini and Marx : Thoughts upon Democracy in Europe</em>. Praeger. 2003.</p>
<p>Patricia Springborg, ‘Karl Marx on Democracy, Participation, Voting, and Equality’,  <em>Political Theory</em>, Vol. 12, No. 4, (Nov. 1984), pp. 537-556.</p>
<p>Popper, Karl R. <em>The Open Society and Its Enemies. Vol.2, The High Tide of Prophecy : Hegel, Marx and the Aftermath</em>. Routledge &amp; K. Paul, 1962, p. 124.</p>
<p>Rubel, Maximilien, et al. <em>Rubel on Karl Marx : Five Essays</em>. Cambridge University Press, 1981, 27-28.</p>
<p>Ruth Levitas ‘Beyond bourgeois right: Freedom, equality and Utopia in Marx and Morris’,  <em>The European Legacy</em>, Vol. 9, No. 5, (Oct. 2004), pp. 605-618.</p>
<hr>
<p>[1]Marx, Karl, et al.  <em>Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844</em>. Foreign Languages Publishing House; Lawrence &amp; Wishart, 1959, p. 43.</p>
<p>[2]Patricia Springborg, ‘Karl Marx on Democracy, Participation, Voting, and Equality’,  <em>Political Theory</em>, Vol. 12, No. 4, (Nov. 1984), pp. 537-539.</p>
<p>[3]Ruth Levitas ‘Beyond bourgeois right: Freedom, equality and Utopia in Marx and Morris’,  <em>The European Legacy</em>, Vol. 9, No. 5, (Oct. 2004), pp. 605-618.</p>
<p>[4]Marx, Karl.  <em>The__Communist Manifesto</em>. Electric Book Company, 2000, p. 30.</p>
<p>[5]Marx, Karl, et al.  <em>Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844</em>. Foreign Languages Publishing House; Lawrence &amp; Wishart, 1959, p. 43.</p>
<p>[6]Patricia Springborg, “Karl Marx on Democracy, Participation, Voting, and Equality”,  <em>Political Theory</em>, Vol. 12, No. 4 (Nov., 1984), p. 552.</p>
<p>[7]Marx, Karl.  <em>Capital</em>,  _A Critique of Political Economy,_<em>Volume I, Book One: The Process of Production of Capital</em>. Progress Publishers, 1967, p. 538.</p>
<p>[8]Patricia Springborg, “Karl Marx on Democracy, Participation, Voting, and Equality”,  <em>Political Theory</em>, Vol. 12, No. 4 (Nov., 1984), p. 552.</p>
<p>[9]Avineri, Shlomo.  _The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx._Cambridge University Press, 1968, p. 17.</p>
<p>[10]Ibid., p. 18.</p>
<p>[11]Marx, Karl, et al.  <em>Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society</em>. Anchor, 1967, p. 173.</p>
<p>[12]Krancberg, Sigmund. “Karl Marx and Democracy.” <em>Studies in Soviet Thought</em>, Vol. 24, No. 1, 1982, pp. 23–35.</p>
<p>[13]Avineri, Shlomo.  _The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx._Cambridge University Press, 1968, p. 17.</p>
<p>[14]Marx, Karl, O’Malley, Joseph.  _Critique of Hegel’s ‘Philosophy of Right’._Cambridge U.P., 1970, §279.</p>
<p>[15]Marx, Karl.  <em>The__Communist Manifesto</em>. Electric Book Company, 2000, p. 37.</p>
<p>[16]Hunt, Richard N.  <em>The Political Ideas of Marx and Engels. 2, Classical Marxism 1850-1895</em>. Macmillan, 1984, p. 247.</p>
<p>[17]Ibid., p. 248.</p>
<p>[18]Ibid., p. 249.</p>
<p>[19]Rubel, Maximilien, et al. <em>Rubel on Karl Marx : Five Essays</em>. Cambridge University Press, 1981, 27-28.</p>
<p>[20]Popper, Karl R. <em>The Open Society and Its Enemies. Vol.2, The High Tide of Prophecy : Hegel, Marx and the Aftermath</em>. Routledge &amp; K. Paul, 1962, p. 124.</p>
<p>[21]Ibid., p. 127.</p>
<p>[22]Abensour, Miguel.  <em>Democracy against the State : Marx and the Machiavellian Moment</em>. Polity, 2011, p. 74.</p>
<p>[23]Mastellone, Salvo.  <em>Mazzini and Marx : Thoughts upon Democracy in Europe</em>. Praeger. 2003, p. 89.</p>
<p>[24]Abensour, Miguel.  <em>Democracy against the State : Marx and the Machiavellian Moment</em>. Polity, 2011, p. 74.</p>

